Semi-drunk text to my cofounder: Company X is no threat.
 
Company X is a direct competitor. Founded by a bunch of i-bankers, their core product amounts to a pretty UI on terrible algorithms. What they took two years to assemble, we built in a few months ... but that's only part of the reason why I'm no longer so concerned about their activities.
 
I ended up at Company X's HQ in sort of the strange way. A good friend of mine was promoting the launch party of a big civil society open source project. Her org was cosponsoring the event, Company X was providing space. I'll admit I had very little interest in the release itself, but the opportunity to check out a rival's work space was not something I was going to pass up.
 
What I found there was pretty telling.
 
You could pick out all the people Company X had invited because they all showed up in stiff business suits. They also kept stopping the speaker to ask how he planned to make money from his open source release. Repeatedly. Employees of Company X kept to themselves, scurrying off to their massive roof deck and giving the blue jeans and T-shirt hackers a wide (and slightly suspicious) berth.
 
I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that Company X can out raise us. Obviously their network is loaded. They probably don't want for much in capital.
 
But technical companies are not built on cash, technical companies are built on talent. If I could address Company X directly I would say "Hey guys, the whole point of sponsoring an event like this is to reach out to people who are passionate about the same things you are and get them interested in your activities ... either as customers, users, or potential hires. Spending the whole night avoiding them and talking among yourselves is more than a missed opportunity."
 
Right now Company X makes its money by selling services to i-banks, but the recent talk on the tech blogs is that they want to move into our space.
 
Good luck.
 
Clients in our space will go where the hacker's go and hackers want companies that understand their culture and respect their ideals. There's a big difference between "startup culture" and "hacker culture" ... it's not all anti-establishment, open source, and anonymity. It's more about intellectual curiosity, creativity and free collaboration. The best hackers are only going to want to work for a company with an i-bank culture if they're being paid i-bank salaries ... and even then, probably not.
 
So, sure, Company X may beat us on capital raised. But they can't build faster, they won't be able to innovate, and I doubt they'll be able to out-recruit us. They will have to pay twice as much for the same level of talent. It's already taking them twice as long to develop.
 
I'm not threatened.
 
But I did take pictures of their whiteboards while I was there :)
